W. ALLEN WALLIS*

The organization, work, membership, and influence of the Statis-
tical Research Group, an Office of Scientific Research and De-
velopment activity at Columbia University during the Second
World War, is described. A detailed account is given of the origins
of sequential analysis in 1943, and a brief account of the origins
at Stanford University in 1942 of the intensive courses in statistical
quality control that were sponsored during the Second World War
by the Office of Production Research and Development.

KEY WORDS: Statistical Research Group; Sequential analysis;
History of statistics; Quality control.

1. INTRODUCTION

The Statistical Research Group (SRG) was based at
Columbia University during the Second World War
and supported by the Applied Mathematics Panel

(AMP) of the National Defense Research Committee
(NDRC), which was part of the Office of Scientific
Research and Development (OSRD). An account of
the SRG should be history, but this one is reminiscence,
albeit fairly well-documented reminiscence. Exploring
the history of one's professional field is often a mark
of maturity. Reminiscing about it is usually a mark
of senility. I have been able, however, to buttress my
reminiscences by four bits of research:

1. From the senior staff of the SRG I have collected
reminiscences. Collecting and summarizing the reminis-
cences of others presumably qualifies as research.

2. With the help of Churchill Eisenhart and Charles
E. Dewing I have obtained a copy of the Final Report
of SRG from the National Archives, where it and other
SRG documents are kept in the Center for Polar and
Scientific Archives.

3. In my own archives I was able to find-more
precisely, Kenneth F. Wood was able to find for me-
an account I wrote in 1950 of the origins and develop-

ment of sequential analysis at SRG in 1943.

* W. Allen Wallis is Chancellor of the University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14627. He was Director of Research of the Statis-
tical Research Group throughout its existence. He became a fellow
of ASA in 1948, was editor of JASA from 1950 to 1959 and presi-
dent of ASA in 1965, received the Chicago chapter's Outstanding
Statistician Award in 1968, and delivered the Presidentially Invited
Addresses at the ASA annual meetings in 1970 and 1978. This
paper is a revision of the Presidentially Invited Address given at
the ASA annual meeting in San Diego on August 14, 1978. Useful
comments, suggestions, or other assistance have been provided to
the author by Kenneth J. Arnold, George A. Barnard, Rollin F.
Bennett, Albert H. Bowker, George E.P. Box, James V. Capua,
Donald A. Darling, W. Edwards Deming, Charles E. Dewing,
Churchill Eisenhart, Harold A. Freeman, Milton Friedman, W.
Jackson Hall, Millard Hastay, William H. Kruskal, Robert K.
Merton, Frederick Mosteller, Bruce S. Old, Edward Paulson,
Mina Rees, Paul A. Samuelson, Herbert Solomon, George J. Stigler,
Stephen M. Stigler, John W. Tukey, Jacob Wolfowitz, Kenneth
F. Wood. and Holbrook Workingr.

320

The Statistical Research Group, 1942-

4. At the last minute I found a needle in a haystack-
a brief document in a mound of musty files-that I will
describe later.

Note that I refer to the Statistical Research Group,
or SRG, not to the Statistical Research Group-Colum-
bia, or SRG-C, as some benighted persons do. The
situation is analogous to that of The Standard Oil
Company. It was founded in 1870 in Cleveland by
John D. Rockefeller; the other Standard Oil companies
were formed later and differentiated themselves from
one another and from The Standard Oil Company by
adding the names of states. Similarly, at least one
other organization was later named Statistical Research
Group and to differentiate itself added the name of its
university, Princeton.

2. QUALITY CONTROL COURSES

My reminiscing can begin appropriately with some
activities early in 1942, soon after war was declared
against the United States by Japan, Germany, Italy,
and their allies. I was then on the faculty at Stanford.
The atmosphere there that spring was satirized by a
squib in the student paper saying, "It is rumored that
in the outside world there is a war and a shortage of
Coca-Cola." As one of several statisticians-Holbrook
Working, Eugene Grant, Quinn McNemar, Harold
Bacon-seeking some way that we at Stanford could

contribute to the war effort, I wrote on April 17, 1942,
to a friend in Washington, W. Edwards Deming of the
Census Bureau, that

Those of us teaching'statistics in various departments here
are trying to work out a curriculum adapted to the immediate
statistical requirements of the war. It seems probable that
a good many students with research training might by training
in statistics become more useful for war than in their present
work, or might increase their usefulness within their present

fields.

It is difficult for us to design such a program because we
do not have a picture of the statistical work of the war. You
are probably in as good a position as anyone to observe what
kinds of statistical training are needed for a wide variety of
purposes. It may not be possible to make any generalizations,
but if it is we would try to put them to enough use to justify
the time and trouble of advising us.

Such problems as the allocation of the available training
time among theoretical work, detailed instruction with machines
and worksheets, and descriptive or analytical techniques-and
what particular techniques to emphasize-are hard to answer
in the abstract. What each of us does normally, of course,

? Journal of the American Statistical Association

June 1980, Volume 75, Number 370

Invited Papers Section

Wallis: The Statistical Research Group, 1942-1945 321

is to place emphasis according to his own personal judgment
and experience, which unfortunately may not be abreast of

war needs.

Deming responded on April 24 with four single-
spaced pages on the letterhead of the Chief of Ordnance,
War Department. After some explanatory background
on the theme that, "The only useful function of a sta-
tistician is to make predictions, and thus to provide
a basis for action," he wrote:

Here is my idea. Time and materials are at a premium,
and there is no time to be lost. There is no royal short-cut
to producing a highly trained statistician, but I do firmly
believe that the most important principles of application can
be expounded in a very short time to engineers and others.
I have done it, and have seen it done. You could accomplish
a great deal by holding a school in the Shewhart methods
some time in the near future. I would suggest a concentrated
effort-a "short" course followed by a "long" course. The
short course would be a two day session for executive and
industrial people who want to find out some of the main
principles and advantages of a statistical program in industry.
It would be a sort of popularization, four lectures by noted
industrial people who have seen statistical methods used, and
can point out some of their advantages. The long course would
extend over a period of weeks, or, if given evenings, over
a longer period. It would be attended by the people who
actually intend to use statistical methods on the job. In many
cases they would be delegated by the men who had attended
the short course.

I would suggest that both courses be thrown open to en-
gineers, inspectors, and industrial people with or without
mathematical or statistical training. Naturally, any person
who has had considerable statistical training would be in a
position to get much more out of the course, but few would
be in this fortunate position . . .

Time is an important factor, and it is highly desirable that
programs of this kind should be held in the near future. Late
in the summer you could repeat the experiment, with im-
provements based on the experience of the first one.

On May 1, I was able to write Deming that, "Your
letter arrived a few hours ago . . . [T]he specific sug-
gestions struck home so well that Holbrook Working

(Chairman of the University Committee on Statistics)
has already talked with two or three of the key people
and arranged a general meeting of everyone in statis-
tics"; on May 21 the first letter about the course went
to firms supplying Army ordnance in the western
region; and the first course was given in July 1942

at Stanford.

The program that resulted from Deming's suggestion

eventually made a major contribution to the war effort.
Its aftermath, in fact, continues to make major con-
tributions not only to the American economy but also
to the Japanese economy.

Although I knew nothing about statistical quality
control, having scarcely heard of Shewhart, Dodge-
Romig, control charts, acceptance sampling, or any of
the rest, I was scheduled to teach in the first course,
together with Eugene L. Grant of the Stanford Engi-
neering School, a man who knew a great deal about
the subject and after the war published a book about it

(Grant 1946). Just as I was beginning to wonder how
to learn what I was supposed to teach, I was asked
by Hildegarde Kneeland to head up an economic re-

search unit in the Office of Price Administration (OPA)
in Washington.

Holbrook Working, an outstanding statistician and
economist at the Food Research Institute at Stanford,
stepped into the quality control course. Before long
Working headed a major national program that put on
dozens of short, intensive courses in statistical quality

control throughout the country and created the nucleus
for the American Society for Quality Control (Working

1943, 1945). Working and his colleagues brought about
a significant increase in the productivity of American
industry, for which he has not yet received proper

recognition.

In the meantime, I had begun assembling a staff for
the OPA job, even before my own appointment was
official; but I received a telegram from Warren Weaver
of the Rockefeller Foundation, who was then head of
the Fire Control Division of NDRC and later head
of the Applied Mathematics Panel, asking if I would
take charge of a statistics group that he was assembling
with Harold Hotelling as principal investigator.

During the spring of 1942, I hurriedly completed and
submitted for publication as much as possible of my
work in progress, because it was uncertain when, if ever,
I could return to it (Wallis 1942 a,b,c).

3. ORGANIZATION

Thus, on July 1, 1942, I found myself meeting with
Weaver, Hotelling, and Jack Wolfowitz, the third
charter member of SRG, on the 56th and 64th floors
of Rockefeller Center the first time I had been in an
office that high in either altitude or importance. I had
been a student of Hotelling's at Columbia in 1935-36,
as Wolfowitz had been later. Weaver had been directed
to Hotelling by Samuel Wilks, another former student
of Hotelling's and something of a protege of Weaver's,
and Hotelling had directed Weaver to Wolfowitz and me.
Wolfowitz and I had become friends in the fall of 1939
when both of us were attending late-afternoon lectures
at Columbia by Abraham Wald, then a new member
of the faculty. We had found a mutual bond not only
in statistics but also in our intense concern about the
war that had just begun in Europe and about the
proper role in it for America. Wolfowitz was teaching
on Staten Island while completing his doctorate, and
I was at the National Bureau of Economic Research
to do economic research on business cycles-which
turned out to be statistical research with Geoffrey
Moore on runs up and down (Wallis and Moore 1941a,b;
Moore and Wallis 1943).

Altogether, 18 principals were to serve on the staff
of SRG between July 1, 1942, and its dissolution on
September 30, 1945. Only one person left before the
end, and he was not a statistician. There were 3 prin-
cipals in the summer of 1942, 8 by the summer of 1943,

16 by the summer of 1944, and 17 at the end in 1945.
The average number for the 39 months was 10. Actu-

322 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1980

ally, I stayed on until March 31, 1946, editing and to
a large extent writing two books based on SRG's work

(SRG 1947, 1948).

In addition to the 18 principals, 60 others served on
the staff at one time or another, a total of 78. The
maximum at one time was about 50. There were statis-
ticians, mathematicians, computers, typists, secretaries,
a switchboard operator, an administrative assistant,
a librarian, and a messenger. Lots of locks, safes, and
security procedures, but no guards.

The administrative structure of SRG at the begin-
ning consisted of me as Director of Research and
Wolfowitz as Associate Director of Research. When
Julian Bigelow and Milton Friedman joined, they too
were called Associate Directors. Thereafter we ceased
giving out that title. While we did not cancel any
titles already assigned, in due course Friedman became
effectively the Associate or Deputy Director and Albert
Bowker the Assistant Director. Bowker's principal re-
sponsibility was to organize and manage the computing,
which was done by about 30 young women, mostly
mathematics graduates of Hunter or Vassar. Some of
the basic statistical tables published in Techniques of
Statistical Analysis (SRG 1948) were computed as
backlog projects when there was slack in the com-

puting load.

For offices we rented an apartment at 401 West
118th Street, one block from Columbia and overlooking
Morningside Heights and Harlem. Eventually we and
two other AMP organizations, the Applied Mathematics
Group of Columbia and the strategic bombing section
of the Statistical Research Group of Princeton, occupied
most of the building. The building adjacent to ours on

118th Street was occupied some of the time by the
Columbia section of the atomic bomb project.

SRG spent about $80,000 the first year, $150,000
the second, and $330,000 the third-a growth rate of

100 percent per year. We did not really budget but
simply did whatever would advance the cause and sub-
mitted the bills. We pinched pennies, however: furni-
ture and equipment, mostly second-hand; no expensive
hotels or restaurants; no entertainment funds; salaries
set on a no-gain, no-loss basis. One principal staff

member still alleges resentfully that the administrative
assistant told him to economize by writing his equa-

tions on both sides of the paper.

If the SRG merits more than a footnote in the history
of American statistics, I suppose it is for one of the
31 reasons that can be composed by using one or more
of five points, which I shall list and then discuss.

1. SRG was composed of what surely must be the
most extraordinary group of statisticians ever organized,

taking into account both number and quality.

2. Sequential analysis, one of the most powerful and
seminal statistical ideas of the past third of a century,
originated at SRG. Its theory was developed and
methods of application were devised there.

3. A variety of useful materials produced at SRG,
both theoretical and practical, while not comparable
with sequential analysis, have nevertheless become
established parts of statistics.

4. The experience of participating in SRG contributed
definitively to the subsequent careers of a substantial
number of persons who were to be leaders in statistics
in the next three decades.

5. SRG was in many respects a model that has not
been equaled of an effective statistical consulting group.

4. THE WORK

I discuss the fifth point first, because it gives an
opportunity to describe SRG's work.

SRG's sole purpose was to serve the Army, Navy,
Air Force, Marines, OSRD, and a few suppliers to
these. Although ultimately SRG was accountable to its
clients, this accountability was filtered, tempered, modu-
lated, and stabilized by the AMP, which was directed
by Warren Weaver, one of the most remarkable, ad-
mirable, brilliant, sagacious, and civilized human beings
on the American scene in the past half-century. Thus,
we were not at the whim of ignorant or arbitrary clients
and were under no pressures to shade our findings to
a client's prejudices or preferences.

Another advantage was that one of our principal
clients, the Navy, had an effective liaison officer, the
Coordinator of Research and Development, Admiral
Julius A. Furer, who had an excellent staff, which in-
cluded a remarkable number of young men who were
to have outstanding and creative careers (Old 1961).
Furer's staff introduced us to persons in the Navy
who could benefit from our services and helped us im-
measurably in innumerable ways in our relations with
the Navy. As a result, SRG's most effective work was
with the Navy.

Another advantage was that we were under steady
pressure to deliver-there was a war on, as the saying
went. Our work, however excellent, was in effect not
delivered if it had no influence; so we had to understand
the client's viewpoint and needs and be persuasive and
accommodating.

Perhaps the strongest discipline resulted from the
fact that when we made recommendations, frequently
things happened. Fighter planes entered combat with
their machine guns loaded according to Jack Wolfowitz's
recommendations about mixing types of ammunition,
and maybe the pilots came back or maybe they didn't.
Navy planes launched rockets whose propellants had
been accepted by Abe Girshick's sampling-inspection
plans, and maybe the rockets exploded and destroyed
our own planes and pilots or maybe they destroyed the
target. During the Battle of the Bulge in December

1944, several high-ranking Army officers flew to Wash-
ington from the battle, spent a day discussing the best
settings on proximity fuzes for air bursts of artillery
shells against -ground troops, -and flew back to the

Wallis: The Statistical Research Group, 1942-1945 323

battle to put into effect advice from, among others,
Milton Friedmani, whose earlier studies of the fuzes
had given him extensive and accurate knowledge of the
way the fuzes actually performed.' We were never
wholly responsible for what happened. In fact, we
seldom knew whether we were slightly responsible or
even knew exactly what happened and to whom. But
this kind of responsibility, although rarely spoken of,
was always in the atmosphere and exerted a powerful,
pervasive, and unremitting pressure.

Sometimes SRG's work evolved by one problem
leading to a related problem and sometimes by a tech-
nique leading to another application of the technique
to an unrelated problem. This is brought out in the
SRG Final Report (SRG 1945a), which I wrote in
September 1945:

The first project assigned SRG was to evaluate the com-
parative effectiveness of four 20 millimeter guns on the one
hand and eight 50 caliber guns on the other as the armament
of a fighter aircraft. This assignment had been preceded by
two months of study of air warfare analysis and plane-to-
plane fire control. This first assignment involved a study of
the geometry and tactics of aerial combat, the probability
of hitting, and the vulnerability of aircraft.

The work on the geometry of aerial combat, particularly
pursuit curves, led to the assignment to SRG of a problem
concerning an automatic dive-bomb sight whose functioning
depended upon pursuit curves. This study led to adding a
man [Bigelow], and later another [Savage], to the staff to
handle such problems. The presence of these men, together
with the experience accumulated, led to the assignment of
certain problems involving homing torpedoes and in turn
to problems involving airborne homing weapons and to work
on guided missiles. The presence of one of the men obtained
initially for the pursuit curve work [Bigelow] resulted in
assignment of a problem of solving linear simultaneous equa-
tions electrically. In the work on the geometry of aerial combat
some attention was given to the probability distribution of
random contacts, and later a study was assigned dealing with
random contacts in submarine searches.

The work on the probability of hitting aircraft led to an
assignment on the probability of anti-aircraft hits on a directly
approaching bomber and this led to a problem concerning
the use of shrapnel against directly approaching planes and
in turn to a study of the risk to our planes fromn anti-aircraft.
Work on the probability of hitting also led to studies of the
dispersion of aircraft machine guns, to work on aircraft turret
sights, and to an evaluation of different guns for anti-aircraft
use. The work on probability of hitting and on aircraft vul-
nerability were also the bases for studies of the effectiveness
of proximity fuzed rockets in air-to-air combat.

The problem of aircraft vulnerability led SRG to devise
a technique for determining vulnerability from damage sur-
vived by our own planes, it led to an assignment concerning
B-29 vulnerability, and it led to an assignment on the area
around standard bombs dangerous to aircraft.

The work on gyroscopic lead computing sights led to an
analysis of the use of such sights and to an assignment on
Navy anti-aircraft directors. It also led to an analysis of the
risk in extending a bombing run and to an analysis of curved
flight predictors. It, together with the work on the probability
of hitting, led to SRG's participating in studies of trial fire

I Proximity fuzes were developed by the OSRD for the Navy.
For security reasons they were not made available to the Army
until December 16, 1944, during the Battle of the Bulge. Thus,
the Army had had no experience in their use. The Navy feared
that as soon as the Army had the fuzes, some would fall into enemy
hands; this, indeed, did happen during the Battle of the Bulge,
but fortunately no harm resulted. (Baxter 1946, pp. 233-236)

procedures for anti-aircraft and of the value of measuring
the muzzle velocity of anti-aircraft fire, and in the preparation
of a bibliography on anti-aircraft effectiveness.

The next problem assigned to SRG that was not related
to those growing out of the plane-to-plane studies was one
concerning the acceptance testing of bomb sights. Although
this study did not itself lead to any others, in the course of
time a number of similar studies were assigned. One of these
involved the comparison of two percentages, which led SRG
to consider the problem of analyzing data sequentially. This
in turn led to consultative work with the Quartermaster Corps
Inspection Service. Another study involved acceptance testing
procedures for Naval ordnance and another involved the
formulation of specifications and acceptance procedures for
rocket propellants. The work on sequential analysis, Naval
ordnance, and rocket propellants led to the preparation of
standard sampling inspection plans for the Navy.

Early in 1943 SRG was asked to determine lead angles for
aircraft torpedo attacks on maneuvering warships. This in-
volved studying torpedo tactics, torpedo performance, the
maneuvering characteristics of warships, and combat ex-
perience. In order to determine the characteristics of enemy
ships, a method was developed and tested (in collaboration
with the Applied Mathematics Groups at Columbia University
and New York University and the Photo Interpretation Center,
Anacostia) for measuring speed and turning radius from the
wake shown in aerial photographs. The work on aircraft
torpedo tactics led to an assignment on the spread to be used
in torpedo salvos fired from surface craft. Another outgrowth
of the torpedo work was an assignment on torpedos following
zigzagged courses.

A number of studies were assigned to SRG solely because
of their dependence on statistical techniques rather than
because their subject matter was similar to other SRG work.
One of these involved the preparation of artificial test data
such as might result from tracking with erratic variations.
Another involved reviewing a manual on probability prepared
for one of the NDRC divisions. Another, begun in the Applied

Mathematics Group, Columbia University, but completed by
an SRG member [Eisenhart] as consultant to the Navy,
involved a statistical study of the vulnerability of merchant
vessels to aircraft torpedoes and bombs. Statistical studies
were also made of stereoscopic range finders, food storage
data, high temperature alloys, the diffusion of mustard gas,
and clothing tests.

A substantial part of the work of SRG consisted of con-
sultation with and informal assistance to the Army, Navy,
or NDRC. Much of this consultation was related to the sub-
ject matter of AMP Studies assigned to SRG, but a great
deal of it grew out of general liaison arrangements and was
presented to SRG because of the techniques involved. A large
part of this consultative work was done in oral conversations
or conferences, although a certain amount is reflected in SRG

documents.

To add detail to that general description of SRG's
work, I list the titles, classifications, and authors of 13
of the 572 substantive reports, memoranda, and letters
that were produced at SRG. I have chosen the first,
every 50th one thereafter, and the last, which is num-
bered 561 because 11 missed serial numbers. (The
letters in parentheses after the titles indicate security
classifications at the time: Secret, Confidential, Re-
stricted, or Open. The classifications usually reflected

the general project to which a report related, not neces-

sarily the content of the specific report.)

1 Outline of Cunningham Papers on Mathe- Wallis-
22 Aug 42 matical Theory of Air Warfare (C) Wolfowitz
51 Conference at Navy Department, 17 June Friedman
18 Jun 43 43 (C)
101 Minimum Front Necessary for a Torpedo Wolf owitz
28 Oct 43 Salvo to Include All Possible Target

Maneuvers (S)

324 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1980

151 Uses for Aircraft Vulnerability Figures (C) Wallis
2 Feb 44
201 Number of Trials Necessary for a Given Hastay
25 Apr 44 Degree of Assurance That If a New De-

sign Is Said to Produce Fewer Failures
Than an Old, Its True Percentage of
Failures Is Not More Than Half That
of the Old (0)
251 SRG Work for Division 9 at Bushnell, Wallis

12 Jun 44 Florida (S)
301 Visit to Bureau of Ships, Navy Dept., Friedman

10 Aug 44 3 August 1944 (C)
351 Sequential Analysis of Double Dichotomies Paulson
7 Nov 44 for Grouped Data When the Groups Are

of Different Sizes for the Two Methods
Being Compared (R)
401 Surface Damage Criteria for Rocket Pro- Bigelow
9 Jan 45 pellants (R)
451 Flak Risk to Controlled-Missile Bomber (C) Savage
1 Mar 45 Mosteller

Williams
501 Evaluation of Test Data for M-9 Director Wallis
19 May 45 With and Without Second Derivative

Prediction (C)
551 Relative Effectiveness of Caliber .50, Cali- Friedman
28 Aug 45 ber .60, and 20 mm Guns As Armament

for Multiple Anti-Aircraft Machine Gun
Turrets (C)
561 Pursuit Performance of Pelican (S) Savage

Oct 45

Four books resulted from SRG's work: Sequential
Analysis (Wald 1947), Sequential Analysis of Statistical
Data: Applications (SRG 1945b), Techniques of Statis-
tical Analysis (SRG 1947), and Sampling Inspection

(SRG 1948). All have proved influential-Wald's far

more than the others, of course.

5. MEMBERSHIP

Now I turn to the first of the characteristics of SRG
that I presume to be of interest, namely, its mem-
bership. In order of duration of service, the 18 principal

members of the staff were

Allen Wallis, 45 months
Harold Hotelling, 39 months
Jacob Wolfowitz, 39 months
Edward Paulson, 35 months
Julian Bigelow, 31 months
Milton Friedman, 31 months
Abraham Wald, 30 months
Albert Bowker, 27 months
Harold Freeman, 21 months
Rollin Bennett, 20 months
Jimmie Savage, 19 months
Kenneth Arnold, 18 months
Millard Hastay, 18 months
Abraham Girshick, 17 months
Frederick Mosteller, 12 months2
Churchill Eisenhart, 11 months
Herbert Solomon, 11 months
George Stigler, 10 months

2 Mosteller was not formally a member of SRG, since his salary
came from another group, a New York branch under John D.
Williams of the Statistical Research Group of Princeton University,
headed by Samuel S. Wilks. Mosteller worked so closely and ex-
tensively with SRG, including being coauthor of two of its books

(SRG 1947, 1948) and coeditor of one (SRG 1948), that it will
astonish members of SRG, as it did me on reviewing the Final
Report, to learn that fiscally he was not a member. The 12 months
listed is my estimate, to the nearest year, of his full-time equiva-
lence in SRG.

Three of these members were part-time: Hotelling,
Wald, and Freeman. In addition, Walter Bartky and
Norbert Wiener served briefly as consultants, and Alan
Treloar was employed by SRG but assigned full-time

to an Army laboratory.

Eight SRG members have been president of the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics: Bowker, Girshick,
Hotelling, Mosteller, Savage, Solomon, Wald, and
Wolfowitz. Four have been president of the American
Statistical Association: Bowker, Eisenhart, Mosteller,
and Wallis. Two have been president of the American
Economic Association: Friedman and Stigler. One is
the 1980 president of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science: Mosteller. One has re-
ceived a Nobel Prize: Friedman. At least nine have
been chairmen of university departments of statistics:
Arnold, Bowker, Girshick, Hotelling, Mosteller, Savage,
Solomon, Wald, and Wallis. Two have become heads
of major universities: Bowker (of two) and Wallis.
I do not know the number of honorary degrees;
Guggenheim, Fulbright, and similar fellowships; and
special lecturerships, prizes, awards, and other honors;

but it must be large.

Of the staff not mentioned in the preceding paragraph,
Bennett is an official of one of the largest life insurance
companies, Bigelow is a permanent fellow at the In-
stitute for Advanced Study, Freeman is a professor at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Hastay is a
prqfessor at Washington State University, and Paulson
is a professor at Queens College (New York).

Members of SRG were in frequent close touch with
other statisticians and mathematicians who have had
distinguished careers, including Eli Bromberg, Richard
Courant, Kurt Friederichs, Saunders MacLane, Jerzy
Neyman, Mina Rees, James Stoker, John Tukey,
Hasler Whitney, Samuel Wilks, and John Williams. All

these had strong influences on members of SRG.

It is perhaps interesting to consider how the major
appointments to SRG came about. As I have said,
Wilks was responsible for Hotelling and Hotelling for
Wolfowitz and me. Hotelling directed my attention to
Paulson, a student of his. Bigelow and Savage were
suggested to me by Weaver, under whom they were
already working, Bigelow with Norbert Wiener at MIT
and Savage with R.G.D. Richardson at Brown. Bowker
was suggested by Bigelow, and Freeman and Arnold
by Bowker. Eisenhart, Mosteller, and Solomon came,
at my request, from other applied mathematics panel
groups. Hastay had been a graduate student of mine
at Stanford in 1938-39. I knew Wald through his lec-
tures at Columbia, and in addition I had become a
personal friend in 1939-40. Other SRG members were
colleagues from my graduate school days at Chicago
and Columbia: Stigler since 1933, Friedman since 1934,
and Bennett and Girshick since 1935. Eight members-
Bennett, Friedman, Girshick, Paulson, Solomon, Wald,
Wallis, and Wolfowitz-had studied or worked with
Hotelling before SRG days. Recruiting was by the

Wallis: The Statistical Research Group, 1942-1945 325

old-boy network pure and unabashed: no advertising,
no competitive examinations, and no attention to race,
sex, age, physical handicap, or apparent nationality or

surname.3

6. SEQUENTIAL ANALYSIS

Turning now to the origins of sequential analysis:
The best I can do in 1980, 37 years after sequential
analysis was created in April 1943, is to quote a long
letter that I dictated to Warren Weaver in March 1950.
In 1950 I was 30 years closer to the events than I am
now, and, furthermore, I had the use of a 37 year old's
memory-something that now I can scarcely recall ever
having had.

Dear Warren:

This is in answer to your letter of January 18th asking
about the history of sequential analysis. You suggest three
headings which I will follow: origin, relation to previous work,
and applications; and I'm adding a fourth, miscellaneous.

A. Origin

Late in 1942 or early in 1943 you assigned us the task of
evaluating an approximation developed by [Navy] Captain
Garret L. Schuyler that was supposed to simplify a com-
plicated British formula for calculating the probability of a
hit by anti-aircraft fire on a directly approaching dive bomber.
Schuyler's approximation was no good. Ed Paulson worked
on the problem for us and was able to give rather simple
formulas bounding the correct probability. It fell to me to
report this to Schuyler during one of my trips to the Navy
Department, and before I left you wished me good luck,
saying that Schuyler was one of the orneriest characters you
had encountered in the Army and Navy; in fact, I believe
you said he was the only downright gruff and disagreeable
high officer you had to that time encountered. I decided that
one of the advantages of not being in uniform was not having
to take the lip of any cheeky admirals or generals, so I made
my approach brief and direct. I reminded Schuyler of his
query and stated that we were now in a position to tell him
how good his formula was. He barked, "How good is it?"
and I replied "No good at all." He snapped, "What's wrong
with it?" This had been anticipated and my reply planned:
"What's right with it? We were unable to see any sense in
it at all." From then on he and I were good friends, and I still
hear from him from time to time.4 That afternoon we had
a long and rambling conversation in the course of which he
got around to statistics. He brought up the problem of the
necessary sample size for comparing two percentages and
gave me a memorandum prepared for him on that subject
by a certain John von Neumann. I had never before heard
of this von Neumann fellow, but the memorandum was ob-
viously pretty smart for a man who apparently knew little
about statistics.

This led Paulson and me to work up the material on com-
paring two proportions which is now presented in Chapter 7
of TECHNIQUES OF STATISTICAL ANALYSIS. When
I presented this result to Schuyler, he was impressed by the
largeness of the samples required for the degree of precision
and certainty that seemed to him desirable in ordnance testing.
Some of these samples ran to many thousands of rounds.
He said that when such a test program is set up at Dahlgren
it may prove wasteful. If a wise and seasoned ordnance expert

3In spite of this "negative action" recruiting, SRG included
a high proportion of women, two blacks, and two persons with
severe physical handicaps.

4Garret Lansing Schuyler, U.S. Navy Rear Admiral (retired),
died at his home in Washington, D.C., at the age of 93, on Janu-
ary 4, 1977. He had won a Navy Cross during the First World
War (Eisenhart 1977).

like Schuyler were on the premises, he would see after the
first few thousand or even few hundred [rounds] that the ex-
periment need not be completed, either because the new
method is obviously inferior or because it is obviously superior
beyond what was hoped for. He said that you cannot give
any leeway to Dahlgren personnel, whom he seemed to think
often lack judgment and experience, but he thought it would
be nice if there were some mechanical rule which could be
specified in advance stating the conditions under which the
experiment might be terminated earlier than planned. I told
him that I was vaguely aware of the existence of some kind
of double sampling procedure used in industrial sampling
inspection, though I knew nothing about it personally.
Schuyler said that he was familiar with that. Incidentally,
Schuyler said that the suggestion of an objective criterion for
stopping early had been made by an aviator from Virginia
named Gwathmey. Later I talked with Gwathmey, but he
seemed to have no idea what it was all about, and no recol-
lection of any such suggestion by him or anyone else.

At any rate, several days after I returned to New York
I got to thinking about Schuyler's comment. Just before
I had gone to SRG, on 1 July 1942, I had completed a paper
on "Compounding Probabilities From Independent Significance
Tests," which was published in ECONOMETRICA in 1942.
This test procedure, invented like almost all good ideas in
statistics by R.A. Fisher, is based on multiplying together the
probabilities from the independents tests, the probabilities
being calculated on the assumption that the null-hypothesis is
correct. One then asksfor the probability distributionof the prod-
uct. This background led me to fool around with Schuyler's
idea by multiplying together the successive probabilities under
the null-hypothesis of the observations as they arise. I got
quite interested in this, and worked out a few numerical
examples trying to discover some principle for setting a critical
level for the product as a function of sample size.

This was early in 1943, after Milton Friedman had joined
SRG but before he had been able to move his family to New
York. He was commuting from Washington to New York
for two or three days each week. He and I regularly had
lunch together, and one day I brought up Schuyler's sug-
gestion. We discussed it at some length, and came to realize
that some economy in sampling can be achieved merely by
applying an ordinary single-sampling test sequentially. That is,
it may become impossible for the full sample to lead to rejec-
tion, or for it to lead to acceptance, in which case there is
no sense in completing the full sample. The fact that a test
designed for its optimum properties with a sample of pre-
determined size could be still better if that sample size were
made variable naturally suggested that it might pay to design
a test in order to capitalize on this sequential feature; that is,
it might pay to use a test which would not be as efficient as
the classical tests if a sample of exactly N were to be taken,
but which would more than offset this disadvantage by pro-
viding a good chance of terminating early when used sequen-
tially. Milton explored this idea on the train back to Wash-
ington one day, and cooked up a rather pretty but simple
example involving Student's t-test.

When Milton returned to New York we spent a great deal
of time at lunches over this matter, and we began to get so
interested that our conversations carried over into the office;
and there began to be a noticeable interference with the work
we were supposed to be turning out. We finally decided to
bring in someone more expert in mathematical statistics
than we. This decision was made after rather careful con-
sideration. I recall talking it over with Milton walking down

Morningside Drive from the office to our apartment. He said
that it was not unlikely, in his opinion, that the idea would
prove a bigger one than either of us would hit on again in
a lifetime. We also discussed our prospects for being able to
work it out ourselves. Milton was pretty confident of our

(his?) ability to squeeze the juice out of the idea, but I had
doubts and felt that it might go beyond our (my!) depth
mathematically. We also discussed the fact that if we gave
the idea away, we could never expect much credit, and would
have to take our chances on receiving any at all. We definitely
decided that even if the credit situation turned out in a way
that disappointed us, there would be nothing to do about it,

326 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1980

publicly or privately.5 At the end of the conversation, which
ended at our apartment after an hour or two, we decided
to turn the whole thing over to Wolfowitz.

The next day we talked with Jack but were totally unable
to arouse his interest. Later, either that day or perhaps another
day, we talked with him individually. We were still unable
to arouse any interest, and there even seemed to be something
distasteful about the idea of people so ignorant of mathematics
as Milton and I venturing to meddle with such sacred ideas
as those of most powerful statistics, etc. No doubt this an-
tipathy was strengthened by our calling the new tests "super-
colossal" on the grounds that they are more powerful than
"most powerful" tests. Finally, we made a big try with Jack
at a lunch at Butler Hall, which ran from twelve until after
three in the afternoon. We could not get from him any criti-
cism of our idea that 'made sense to us, and yet we could not
make a dent on him. We finally asked what he would think
of our talking with Wald about the problem; he was somewhat
cool to this proposal, apparently considering Wald's time too
valuable to be wasted.

We got Wald over the next morning and explained the idea
to him. Wolfowitz was present, I believe, and I know that
Hotelling and Paulson were. In discussing the idea with
Paulson, he had said that Hotelling had once mentioned
something along the same lines, pointing out that if one is
to toss a coin one hundred times to test its bias, and has
established the criterion that a 60-40 division or worse will
cast doubt on the coin, then there is no use continuing to 100
if earlier 60 heads or 60 tails are reached. Hotelling, according
to Paulson, had further suggested that he had some notions
about how to go about looking for a solution to the problem
of stopping such sampling earlier, saying that the ideas were
related to those of heat flow in the presence of an absorptive
barrier. Hotelling contributed the term "sequential" to de-
scribe the method of analysis, though I believe that this was
at a later conference when Wald presented his results. We
presented the problem to Wald in general terms for its basic
theoretical interest, and as a practical example cited the
problem of comparing two fire control devices with a hit or
miss classification of each round.

At this first meeting Wald was not enthusiastic and was
completely noncommital. I am inclined to attribute this to
the fact that Wolfowitz had spoken to him the preceding
evening, after our appointment had been arranged.

The next day Wald phonied that he had thought some
about our idea and was prepared to admit that there was
sense in it. That is, he admitted that our idea was logical
and worth investigating. He added, however, that he thought
nothing would come of it; his hunch was that tests of a se-
quential nature might exist but would be found less powerful
than existing tests. On the second day, however, he phoned
that he had found that such tests do exist and are more
powerful, and furthermore he could tell us how to make them.
He came over to the office and outlined his sequential proba-
bility ratio to us. This is the ratio of the probability under
the null-hypothesis, with which I had been puttering around,
to the probability under the alternative hypothesis-or rather,
the reciprocal of this ratio. He found the critical levels by an
inverse probability argument, showing that the same critical
levels result no matter what assumption is made about the
a priori distribution. After some further work on the general
method, he proposed the procedure for testing double di-
chotomies sequentially that is presented in Section 3 of
SEQUENTIAL ANALYSIS OF STATISTICAL DATA:
APPLICATIONS.

It was quite a while before Wald worked out all of the
theoretical justifications of his initial results. Actually it was
a very short time in view of the amount of work he achieved.

B. Relation to Previous Work

While it later developed that there had been previous work
related to sequential analysis, you can see from the foregoing
account that Wald's development did not actually grow out

5 As it turned out, we were satisfied with the acknowledgments
expressed by Wald (Wald 1945a, p. 120; 1947, p. 2).

of preceding work. Though you will note that at my first
conversation with Schuyler, I had mentioned Dodge's double
sampling developed at the Bell Laboratories, it was not until
applications of sequential analysis had progressed rather far
that the relations to double sampling received further atten-
tion. After Deming heard about sequential analysis at that
dinner you and I had with him at the Cosmos Club, he wrote
me that sequential analysis seemed to be mathematically
similar to some work by Lord Rayleigh on the random walk
problem in physics. In talking with Walter Bartky about
Wald's work when he and I were both consultants for Francis
Bitter, he told me that he had done similar work some years
before at Western Electric. Apparently this had been refused
for publication earlier, but it was now speeded through and
appeared in the Annals of Mathematical Statistics. Later we
heard of British work along the same lines. In the interest
of international amity we used to refer to this as if it were
somehow on a par with Wald's sequential analysis, but my
impression is that in point of fact it was not really compa-
rable at all except for some vague similarity of purpose.'
It has been pointed out by Polya, and no doubt others, that
sequential analysis is very similar to the seventeenth or
eighteenth century (which is it?-you will know) problem
of the gambler's ruin.

The real relationship of Wald's work to previous work,
however, is to the Neyman-Pearson theory of testing statis-
tical hypotheses. In a sense, Wald's development of the se-
quential probability ratio test is a straight-forward application
of the principles of testing hypotheses developed by Neyman
and Pearson. They showed that the probability ratio (they
call it the likelihood ratio) is the appropriate basis for a test
of significance. Wald simply sequentialized it.

C. Applications

On the whole SRG did not have much direct influence on
or responsibility for applications, but I suppose most of the
major applications were indirectly influenced by our work.
While Wald was still preparing his monograph on the theory,
we started to work on a book on applications. We were under-
staffed at that time, and other work had higher priority.
Finally, we arranged with Harold Freeman of MIT to take
on the job as a special assignment. He wrote the first version
of SEQUENTIAL ANALYSIS OF STATISTICAL DATA:
APPLICATIONS. While he was working on this, he was
called in by the Boston office of the Quartermaster Corps
for advice on acceptance inspection, and it seemed to him
that sequential analysis was eminently suitable for their prob-
lem. He therefore gave a series of lectures to the staff, in-
cluding the top officer, a Colonel Rogow who had come to
the Quartermaster Corps from Sears Roebuck and who after
the war became president of Eversharp. Rogow was apparently
extremely energetic and dynamic (I never actually met him
myself), and shortly thereafter was put in charge of the entire
Inspection Service of the Quartermaster Corps. At that time
the QMIS was in pretty bad shape all around, and Rogow
shook it up thoroughly. They made innumerable changes, one
being the introduction of sequential analysis. Freeman worked
with them closely at this time, in developing their sampling
procedures and in lecturing to their staff. It was in these
initial training courses that the demonstration involving a field
cook stove (gasoline burning) was put on. I have forgotten
the details of this, except that the sequential method reached
the correct decision much more often than did the method
previously in use and with much less inspection. Rogow en-
countered considerable opposition in introducing sequential
analysis, particularly from the Army Ordnance Department
which had thought that the QMC would use its double sam-
pling plans and had sent Dodge on a tour of QMC depots
to explain the system. Rogow caused a good deal of resent-

6 This is not, of course, the last word in relation to the British
contribution to sequential analysis, but it does describe the at-
titude that those of us at SRG had at the time, which was essen-
tially to be so absorbed in our work as to pay only passing atten-
tion to similar work by others. Communication was difficult and
we had very little information about the work going on in England
except that some was going on.

Wallis: The Statistical Research Group, 1942-1945 327

ment by his high-handed and extremely forceful methods,
but he achieved an amazingly quick revolution in the QMIS.
Actually, sequential analysis deserves only a small part of the
credit for the total improvement achieved. Much of the im-
provement was due simply to better methods of inspecting
given items, better methods of reporting, etc. Nevertheless,
sequential analysis became the opposite of a scapegoat:
something to which all the credit could be attached, so that
it would not be necessary to say that they were simply doing
what could have been done twenty years sooner.

The Navy interests in sequential analysis came first from
John Curtiss. I gave him Wald's basic formulas at lunch one
day at the Water Gate Inn. He was quick to perceive the
usefulness of sequential analysis in sampling-inspection work.
Indeed, my impression is that this may have preceded Free-
man's work. Curtiss was the first to suggest to me that the
decision criteria be transformed from levels of the likelihood
ratio to levels for the actual count of defectives, to be shown
as a function of sample size. This was an adaptation of the
standard tables of acceptance and rejection numbers used by
Army Ordnance and taken by them from the Bell Laboratories.
At SRG we later thought of the graphical presentation of
these acceptance and rejection numbers.

As far as I know, sequential analysis was never actually
used on the rocket propellant study. Rocket propellant pro-
duction was under Army Ordnance, even when done for the
Navy, and they would have nothing to do with sequential
analysis. Some of the big savings there were made by increasing
lot size, since the product was essentially homogeneous, and by
using variables instead of attributes as a basis of decision.

D. Miscellaneous Comments

So much for your three headings. A few additional com-
ments occur to me that might have been put in earlier. One
of the big theoretical developments after Wald's initial results
was the discovery of methods of deriving power functions or
operating characteristic curves. This came about in the fol-
lowing manner. In most of the simple, standard tests four
parameters are specified to derive the test, usually described
as specifications of good and of bad quality (there must be
a gap between them) and of the two risks of error. When
the test is constructed, however, it turns out to involve two
parallel straight lines. Thus, you put in four parameters and
you get out three. Friedman was the first to point this out,
and he naturally asked, "Where is the vanished parameter?"
More specifically he pointed out that there must be many
combinations of the original four parameters which lead to
the same final set of three. Now, finding all of the sets of four
that lead to a given set of three amounts to finding what the
probabilities of acceptance are for all possible lot qualities,

which is what is known as the operating characteristic curve.
Its complement is called the power function. Friedman found
this by a rather ingenious device for the binomial distribution.
Wald overcame a technical obstacle to extending Friedman's
method to continuous distributions. Later we had a memo
from England in which a Miss Stockman had derived the
operating characteristic curve for the binomial case. Wald
says that George Brown had derived it, too, though neither
Milton nor I knows anything of this directly. At any rate,
this opened up a whole new range of activity for Wald's
theoretical abilities, and a whole new spurt in theoretical
developments.

Another point which received considerable attention was
the problem of making an estimate from a sample collected
for sequential test purposes. Such samples lead to biased
estimates if one applies the estimating procedures that could
be used with ordinary random sarfiples. A great deal of high
powered work was put on this during the war, most of it by
Wald, quite a bit by Girshick, and some by Wolfowitz, Tukey,
Savage, and others. Just after the war you sent me a 3 X 5
slip saying "See Nature, no. 3924, page xxx." We saw this,
and it was essentially an estimate from a highly special type
of sequential sample.7 It started Savage and Mosteller off,

I See Haldane (1945).

and eventually they discovered how to form unbiased esti-
mates from sequential samples. At about the same time,
Girshick, who had by then returned to Washington, discovered
the same results. The three of them got together and published
the paper.8 This opened up another large flurry which is still
under way, and dragged in several mathematicians not pre-
viously very familiar to statisticians. Attention shifted to the
problem of sequential estimation proper, that is, the problem
of collecting a sample sequentially for maximum efficiency in
estimation. I had raised this problem with Wald right after
he worked out his test procedure, and he had gone so far as
to show that in the case of a normal distribution with known
variance there is no sequential estimate as efficient as a single
sample estimate. More recently, Stein has shown that when
the variance is unknown, a sequential estimate can be ob-
tained which is practically as efficient as a single sample
estimate with known variance. Anscombe published a note on
sequential estimation in BIOMETRIKA for 1949.

We had a little incident with Thornton Fry after he became
Acting Chief of the Panel. This is an incident which I look
back on with some satisfaction, arising partly from the fact
that I won out and got the book published over his deter-
mined opposition, and partly from the amusing fact that this
was not due to my astuteness but to his outfoxing himself.
One of the highlights of the Fry affair was a conference of
Mina Rees, Sam Wilks, Fry, and myself to decide what to do
about the book, Fry having promised to support the decision
of the group. After some discussion he ruled Mina voteless
and called for Sam's vote. It took him a good hour to wring
a vote out of Sam, who wouldn't say yes or no about publica-
tion but always thought of an alternative or a compromise.
Finally Fry said, "Sam, you're the hardest man to pin down
that I ever encountered. Just say yes or no." Sam said that
if it was put that way, and if it really wasn't possible to do
this, that, or the other, then he really wouldn't want to see
the book not published. Fry said he had given his word, so
would support the decision, but he wanted us to know that
it was the wrongest decision he ever participated in. He then
wrote to Ward Davidson recommending publication but ex-
plaining that this recommendation went much against his
grain, was thoroughly against both NDRC and SRG interests,
and was made because he had promised to make it. Davidson
turned it down. Fry insisted then that we drop the whole
matter of publication and immediately order 200 copies that
had been requested by the Air Force. As soon as the order
was irrevocably placed, I got Columbia to write NDRC,
by-passing Fry and Davidson, an offer to provide 200 copies
free, thus saving the government $2,025, if allowed to publish
the book commercially. Since no government official could
risk refusing so clear-cut a direct cash saving, we had no

further troubles.

Somewhere around the office I have various documents that
would fill in this story in more detail. For one thing, shortly
after Wald started work on sequential analysis in April 1943,
he asked me about the origin of the idea and I gave him a
written memo on it. This is surely somewhere in my files.
I would hate to hunt anything in those files, but if it really
interests you I will.

Sincerely yours,
Allen Wallis

On August 7, 1978, after futile searches for that
April 1943 memo had been made for me at the Na-
tional Archives, the Library of Congress, and the
Defense Department, I poked into a veritable haystack
of old files in my basement. The second drawer I chose
started with letters to Albert Bowker in the spring
of 1946 offering him an appointment at Stanford and

8 Mosteller informs me (1978) that, "Girshick had not discovered
the same results. He had some asymptotic work he had done.
It turned out that his work was not at all close to ours. We pub-
lished with him primarily because of your concerns about sending
two groups off to do the same job."

328 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1980

ended with the needle I was seeking, the 1943 memo-
randum to Wald. I quote the memorandum complete,
not so much because it adds to or subtracts from the
account in the letter to Weaver, as for the interest in
comparing an account written within a week or two of
the events with an account written after seven years.
To the best of my recollection, I had not seen the 1943

memorandum again until August 1978. It is dated

April 3, 1943.

Memorandum to: A. Wald
From: W. A. Wallis
Subject: HISTORY OF SEQUENTIAL TEST

Your inquiry last night about the history of the problem
you are working on set me to "reminiscing"-if that term
can be applied to events only a few weeks old.

The idea that sequential tests would have far reaching
consequences for the theoretical foundations of statistics, quite
beyond their immediate practical applications, and that in
a sense they improve the power of "most powerful" tests,
originated jointly with Milton Friedman and myself.

I can perhaps claim to have supplied the initiative in the
first stages by devising an elementary sequential test which
demonstrated that in circumstances where the test criterion
used was "most powerful" exactly the same power and exactly
the same region of rejection could be secured with a smaller
expected number of trials (my memorandum 3-23-3A [March
23, 1943] presents the test). In other words, this demonstrated
that the classical tests become more efficient when the ob-
servations are treated sequentially instead of en masse as in
the classical procedure.

I presented this idea to Milton during the period March 23
to 26. (I had discussed with him the practical merits of se-
quential tests during the preceding week but neither of us
had developed any definite ideas about how to construct such
a test, nor had we seen any theoretical interest in the problem.)
He was greatly interested and we discussed the implications
at some length. During these conversations we developed the
idea of modifying the region of rejection in such a way that
it would become most powerful relative to a sequential analysis
of the data-i.e., sacrificing some of the power relative to
a fixed expectation of N. I should say that it was at this second
stage that we attained a fairly clear-cut formulation of the
problem and its potentialities, with perhaps some vague notions
about the kind of solution required. (At this point we talked
the idea over with Jack Wolfowitz, but he, being somewhat
less impetuous and considerably more mathematically sophis-
ticated than we, was inclined to doubt the existence of a se-
quential test which would have for given power and size of
region an expected number of trials less than the number
required for the same power and size of region with clas-
sical tests.)

Milton then assumed the initiative and actually constructed
a simple example of what we were then calling a colossal test

(in contrast with those merely "most powerful"). He showed
this to me during the period March 30 to April 2. Though
it left much to be desired, it seemed to us pretty definite
confirmation of our ideas of the preceding week that "most
powerful" tests can be in a certain sense more powerful if the
region of rejection is altered to take sequence into account.
It also became clear that the idea deserved much more thorough
exploitation than Milton and I were able to provide, and
besides constituted by its fascination a menace to Milton's,
Jack's, and my obligations to the NDRC; so we decided to
try to foist it on you. Our pangs at parting with so promising
a child are offset by our pride and joy at its amazing develop-
ment in its present opulent home.

The idea of a sequential test was first mentioned to me by
Ed Paulson in February when we were working on our memo-
randum 3-6-3AE [March 6, 1943] on "Number of Trials
Necessary for Comparing Two Percentages." Ed said that
Professor Hotelling had mentioned that he had thought of
setting some kind of a bound, a function N, the crossing of
which would lead to rejection of the null' hypothesis. This

would avoid the necessity of determining N in advance. Ed
said that Hotelling had said he had some ideas on how to go
about constructing such a test. Ed and I agreed that such
a solution would be highly practical but it slipped into the
back of my mind.

However, on March 13 I talked with Captain G.L. Schuyler
about our memo 3-6-3AE. Captain Schuyler said that Lt.
E.W. Gwathmey had suggested devising a chart on which
results would be plotted continuously, with two lines drawn
on the chart in advance. Crossing one would mean rejection,
crossing the other acceptance. I talked with Gwathmey for
a couple of hours or more that afternoon. (Incidentally, he
gave no indication of having heard of the control line idea
before, which puzzled me.) It seemed to me that Gwathmey
was pretty badly confused on the whole subject, and since
he is unquestionably a first-rate man that worried me. He
made two points: that he couldn't understand what we did,
and anyway didn't think we faced the real problem. All in all,
I felt that while what we had said was undoubtedly "true,"
and the best that could be done, Gwathmey's confusion was
not unjustified. Consequently, I began thinking about the
problem of a sequential test. At that stage, I was viewing
it purely as a specific practical problem. And as we explained
to you, it is for the double dichotomy that we hope to have
the first application of the procedure you have worked out.

In 1974, Donald A. Darling gave a paper on "The
Birth, Growth, and Blossoming of Sequential Analysis"

(Darling 1976). In several essential respects, it is not

consistent with my accounts of 1943, 1950, and now 1980.

The impact of sequential analysis on statistical
theory and practice can be judged by others better
than by me, for it is 25 years since I last participated
in technical statistics. Harold Freeman suggested using
as an index the number of articles with the term se-
quential analysis in their titles listed in An Author and
Permuted Title Index to Selected Statistical Journals

(Joiner et al. 1970). This volume covers six journals

for varying periods, mostly in the 1960's. I counted 195
such titles. Since 75 journal-years are covered, this
comes to 2.6 articles on sequential analysis per year
per journal. Each of the 1975 and 1976 volumes of the
Current Index to Statistics lists between 50 and 55
articles including the term sequential analysis in their
titles. Sequential analysis even today, 37 years after
its discovery, continues to exert a strong influence on
statistical research.

My last two headings must be disposed of briefly.

7. INFLUENCE

The continuing influence of other work done at SRG
can be documented by the continuing citations to
Sampling Inspection and to Techniques of Statistical
Analysis. The heart of Sampling Inspection survives in
revision after revision of military acceptance sampling
specifications. Requests for permission to reprint parts
of both these books continue to arrive occasionally-
especially Techniques of Statistical Analysis, which one
publisher asked to reprint complete. (Both books have
been in the public domain for more than 20 years.)
If I were researching rather than reminiscing, I would

count entries in citation indexes.

The effect of SRG on the subsequent careers of its
members was probably greatest on Jimmie Savage, who

Wallis: The Statistical Research Group, 1942-1945 329

came to SRG as an applied mathematician, innocent
of statistics. The fact that 7 of the 18 principals were
primarily or secondarily economists-Bennett, Fried-
man, Hastay, Hotelling, Stigler, Wald, and Wallis-un-
questionably exerted a profound influence on the later
statistical work of all members of SRG, but especially
on Savage's. It is, of course, hard to separate the im-
pact of the economists in SRG from the great influence
on all statistical theory immediately after the war of
game theory and decision theory, both of which are

essentially economic theories.

The only members of SRG whose subsequent careers
were not much affected by the SRG experience, as far
as I can tell, were Bennett, Bigelow, and Stigler-an

electrical engineer and two economists.

Of the 18 principals in SRG, 4 have died: Girshick,
Hotelling, Savage, and Wald; their biographies appear
in the International Encyclopedia of Statistics (Kruskal
and Tanur 1978). All those who are living, except
Bigelow, responded to my request for reminiscences.
Several themes that appear in most of the responses
were well articulated by Kenneth Arnold:

It is a pleasure to recall the days of SRG. I had not seen
such concentrated cooperation before nor have I since. The
joy of working with others toward a goal we all considered
of paramount importance was enhanced by the urgency we
felt. The importance of the problems, association with highly
intelligent individuals, the fact that what we did made a dif-
ference, all contributed to satisfaction with being a part of
the group. The individuals composing SRG had a common
core of knowledge of statistics but differed greatly in their
approach to problems.

My recollections have less to do with specific accomplish-
ments by specific individuals than with the feeling that the
interchange of ideas among members of SRG in their attempts
to solve practical problems brought forth a new balance among
the concepts which give statistics its vitality. Each member
of SRG had his own version of this balance, but there was
much in common. It could be that the development of statis-
tics in the United States for the next twenty years was fore-
ordained but I prefer to believe that SRG was responsible for
the fact that many a discussion at a meeting of statisticians
sounded like a continuation of a discussion begun at SRG.

Several of the younger men expressed a view that

Bowker put this way:

I was able to meet and talk with many people who were
or were to be major leaders in the field. I could drop in on
most of them. Doors were frequently left open and I must
say I found it very exciting intellectually to be treated as a
colleague and friend rather than as a student. I had many
conversations with people who like to talk and explain. I tried
to pattern the department at Stanford on SRG.

Several letters mentioned that SRG functioned during
what Hastay called "one of the great creative periods
in statistical science," a time when, in Freeman's words,

Statistical interest and relevance were high. Testing hy-
potheses, estimation theory were alive. The Fisher-Neyman
controversies were unsettled. Sequential theory, decision
theory, game theory, Bayesian notions, all exciting innova-
tions, were underway. Those were effective years for statistical
theory and application.

Then Freeman added a sentiment expressed in several
letters and felt by all of us: "Ghastly that such progress

should have involved, even depended on, the deaths of
millions of people thousands of miles away."

Nearly everyone mentioned at least one person who
had influenced him particularly strongly. It is no sur-
prise that the two mentioned most frequently by far
were Friedman and Wald. Others mentioned by a sub-
stantial fraction of the respondents were Bigelow,
Bowker, Eisenhart, Girshick, Hotelling, Savage, and
Wolfowitz, and nearly everyone was mentioned at least
once. (I have ignored references to me for reasons
obvious to any statistician.)

Bennett reminded me of a "mathematical recreation"
that consumed a large amount of lunchtime attention
for several weeks:

Given 12 coins, all of the same weight except one, and
using only a two-pan balance, find the odd coin and determine
whether it is heavier or lighter than the others, making only

three weighings.

Others remembered what an elegant general solution
to this whole class of problem had been produced by
Bennett.

Friedman reported an important contribution of his

work at SRG to his later work in economics:

One article of mine that in a very important sense grew
almost entirely out of the work of SRG was the article which
I wrote in 1953 on "Choice, Chance, and the Personal Dis-
tribution of Income." It traced directly to our work on the
proximity fuze. One element in the work on the proximity
fuze was the attempt to approximate the time distribution of
bursts. The proximity fuze had two impulses, one forward
and one backward. As a result there were generally two modes
in the distribution. We treated this as the sum of two separate
distributions and ultimately decided that it could best be
treated as the sum of two exponential distributions. The
resemblance of those distributions of bursts to income dis-
tributions got me started to thinking about whether the same
method could not be used to describe income distributions,
and that result is directly and immediately reflected in the
article I referred to. (Friedman 1953)

Friedman's inspiration to fit the fuze data by joining
a positive and a negative exponential distribution, thus
generating a sharp-pointed mode, followed an evening
of conversation about economics with Arthur F. Burns,
who questioned the assumption, which is made a priori
by economists, that no economic series or distribution
ever has a discontinuity in the first derivative-or

probably any other derivative either.

There is a legend about SRG that I should mention.
It is said that as Wald worked on sequential analysis
his pages were snatched away and given a security
classification. Being still an "enemy alien," he did not
have a security clearance so, the story has it, he was
not allowed to know of his results. This story justifies
a remark with which Jimmie Savage often responded
to astonishing news: "I wouldn't believe it if I had
made it up myself." As a matter of fact, I did make
this one up myself. We were irritated and amused by
the fact that Wald's work on sequential analysis was
classified while he had no clearance. In a casual con-
versation one day, I exclaimed in irritation, "What do
they expect us to do, snatch the pages away as each

330 Journal of the American Statistical Association, June 1980

is completed and keep it secret from him?" This petu-
lant joke has become part of the history of statistics.
The reason sequential analysis was classified, and the
reason it could not be declassified, even though it was
requested by the top people in SRG, AMP, NDRC,
and OSRD, was that the funds supporting SRG had
been appropriated by Congress for classified work.
Therefore, anything substantive that we did was clas-
sified. About six months before the war ended, the
Army got sequential analysis declassified. They argued
that its wide dissemination throughout industry was
important to the war effort and that classification
impeded full and speedy dissemination. A pleasant
by-product of the classification of sequential analysis
was that Wald's citizenship was granted expeditiously,
making him one of the few enemy aliens to receive
citizenship during the war.

8. CONCLUSION

The invitation to prepare this paper referred also to
my other organizational activities in statistics. I had
parts, ranging from minor to major, in the establish-
ment of five university departments of statistics:
Columbia, Stanford, Chicago, Harvard, and Rochester,
all of which I believe to be strong enough to justify
pride in even small roles. I edited the Journal of the
American Statistical Association for almost the whole
decade of the 1950's; what I would point to about my
editorship is the group of associate editors who worked
with me9 and the way we organized the editing and
refereeing. As chairman of the editorial advisory board
and of the executive committee of the International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, which was prepared
between 1962 and 1968, I was largely responsible for
selecting the editors for statistics and economics.'0
I was chairman of the President's Commission on
Federal Statistics in 1970-71, and since I was allowed
a major part in selecting its members, there too I can
take pride in its membership and staff" and in its
continuing influence.

REFERENCES

Baxter, James Phinnev III (1946), Scientists Against Time, Boston:

Little, Brown. (This is the brief official history of the Office
of Scientific Research and Development.)
Darling, Donald A. (1976), "The Birth, Growth, and Blossoming

of Sequential Analysis," in On the History of Statistics and
Probability, ed. D.B. Owen, New York and Basel: Marcel Dekker,
369-375.

9 The associate editors of JASA, usually six at a time, while
I was editor were Sidney S. Alexander, Albert H. Bowker, Churchill
Eisenhart, Solomon Fabricant, Harold A. Freeman, Millard Hastay,
Clifford Hildreth, Howard L. Jones, Lester S. Kellogg, Nathan
Keyfitz, George M. Kuznets, William G. Madow, Philip J.
McCarthy, Frederick Mosteller, I. Richard Savage, and C. Ashley
Wright.

l?The editor for statistics was William H. Kruskal, who was
assisted by Judith M. Tanur. They have compiled the statistics
articles from IESS, with additions, to form the International
Encyclopedia of Statistics, published in 1978.

11 Members of the President's Commission on Federal Statistics
of 1970-71 were Ansley J. Coale, Paul M. Densen, Solomon
Fabricant, Robert D. Fisher, W. Braddock Hickman, William H.
Kruskal, Stanley Lebergott, Frederick Mosteller (vice chairman),

Eisenhart, Churchill (1977), "The Birth of Sequential Analysis"

(Obituary note on retired Rear Admiral Garret Lansing
Schuyler), Amstat News, 33, 3.
Freeman, Harold A. (1944), Sequential Analysis of Statistical Data:

Applications, New York: Statistical Research Group, Columbia
University. (Ring binder of seven booklets. Also see Statistical
Research Group 1944.)
Friedman, Milton (1953), "Choice, Chance, and the Personal

Distribution of Income," Journal of Political Economy, 61,
277-290.
Grant, Eugene L. (1946), Statistical Quality Control, New York:

McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Haldane, J.B.S. (1945), "A Labour-Saving Method of Sampling,"

Nature, 155, 49-50.
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (1968), ed. David

L. Sills, New York: The Free Press.
International Encyclopedia of Statistics (1978), eds. William B.

Kruskal and Judith M. Tanur, New York: The Free Press.
Joiner, Brian L., Laubscher, N.F., Brown, Eleanor S., and Levy,

Bert (1970), An Author and Permuted Title Index to Selected
Statistical Journals, Washington, D.C.: U.S. National Bureau
of Standards Special Publication No. 321.
Moore, Geoffrey H., and Wallis, W. Allen (1943), "Time Series

Significance Tests Based on Signs of Differences," Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 38, 153-164.
Old, Bruce S. (1961), "The Evolution of the Office of Naval Re-

search," Physics Today, 14, 30-35.
SRG, Columbia University (1945a), Final Report (submitted to

the Applied Mathematics Panel, National Defense Research
Committee in completion of research under Contract OEMsr-618
between the trustees of Columbia University and the Office of
Scientific Research and Development. Available at the U.S.
National Archives and Record Service, Center for Polar and
Scientific Archives, Washington, D.C.).

(1945b), eds. Harold A. Freeman, M.A. Girshick, and
W. Allen Wallis, Sequential Analysis of Statistical Data: Ap-
plications, New York: Columbia University Press. (Ring binder
of eight booklets. A revision and expansion of Freeman 1944.)

(1947), eds. Churchill Eisenhart, Millard W. Hastay, and
W. Allen Wallis, Selected Techniques of Statistical Analysis for
Scientific and Industrial Research and Production and Management
Engineering, New York and London: McGraw-Hill Book Co.

(1948), eds. Harold A. Freeman, Milton Friedman, Frederick
Mosteller, and W. Allen Wallis, Sampling Inspection: Principles,
Procedures, and Tables for Single, Double, and Sequential Sampling
in Acceptance Inspection and Quality Control Based on Percent
Defective.
Wald, Abraham (1945a), "Sequential Tests of Statistical Hy-

potheses," Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 16, 117-186.

(1945b), "Sequential Method of Sampling for Deciding
Between Two Courses of Action," Journal of the American Sta-
tistical Association, 40, 277-306.

(1947), Sequential Analysis, New York: John Wiley &
Sons.
Wallis, W. Allen (1941), "A Significance Test for Time Series

Analysis," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 36,
401-409.

(1942a), "The Temporal Stability of Consumption Pat-
terns," Review of Economic Statistics, 24, 177-183.

(1942b), "Compounding Probabilities From Independent
Significance Tests," Econometrica, 10, 229-248.

(1942c), "How to Ration Consumers' Goods and Control
Their Prices," American Economic Review, 32, 501-512.
Wallis, W. Allen, and Moore, Geoffrey H. (1941), A Significance

Test for Time Series and Other Ordered Observations, New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Working, Holbrook (1943), "Making Statistical Methods Con-

tribute to the War Effort," American Statistical Association
Bulletin, 3, 2-4.

(1945), "Statistical Quality Control in War Production,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 40, 425-447.

Richard M. Scammon, William H. Shaw, Frank D. Stella, James
A. Suffridge, John W. Tukey, and W. Allen Wallis (chairman).
Daniel B. Rathbun was executive director of the staff, Paul
Feldman was deputy executive director, Norman V. Breckner was
assistant director, and there were seven other professionals on

the staff.

